.\" Description: strntol.3 version 2.1 man page 2015-10-01T02:32:23Z
.\" common man macros to V7, V10, DWB2 (unique ones omitted, differences noted)
.\" .TH n c x	V7,10	begin page n of chapter c; x is extra commentary
.\" .TH t s c n	DWB2	beg. pg. t of sect. s; c=extra comment, n=new man. name
.\"			c appears at bottom center of page, n at top center
.\" .SH text		subhead
.\" .SS text		sub-subhead
.\" .B text		make text bold
.\" .I text		make text italic
.\" .SM text		make text 1 point smaller than default
.\" .RI a b		concatenate and alternate Roman, Italic fonts <=6 args
.\" .IR .RB .BR .IB .BI	similar to .RI
.\" .PP			new paragraph
.\" .HP in		hanging paragraph with indent in
.\" .TP in		indented paragraph with hanging tag (on next line)
.\" .IP t in		indented paragraph with hanging tag t (arg 1)
.\" .RS in		increase relative indent by in
.\" .RE k		return to kth relative indent level (1-based)
.\" .DT			default tab settings
.\" .PD v		inter-paragraph spacing v (default 0.4v troff, 1v nroff)
.\" \*R			registered symbol	(Reg.)
.\" \*S			change to default type size
.lg 0	\" avoid groff's butt-ugly ligatures
.nh	\" no hyphenation
.ds ]W \" no 7th Edition designation
.ds xx strntol
.TH \*(xx 3 ""
.SH NAME	\" 1 line	name \- explanatory text
.B \*(xx
\- convert string to long integer using up to a specified maximum number of significant input digits
.SH SYNOPSIS
\fB#include <strntol.h>\fP
.PP
.B long strntol(const char *s, size_t n, char **endptr, int base,
.B void (*)(int, void *, const char *, ...),
.B void *);
.PP
.SH DESCRIPTION
.nh	\" no hyphenation
.B strntol
is similar to
.I strtol
but provides a means to limit the extent of the conversion.
The string pointer,
.IR endptr ,
and
.I base
are exactly like
.IR strtol .
The
second
argument
.I n
specifies the maximum number of significant digits
of the input string to use for the conversion.
A leading '0' digit for base 8
(which is implied if base is given as 0 and if the first input string digit is '0' not followed by 'x' or 'X'),
or a leading "0x" or "0X" for base 16
(implied for base given as 0 if the input string begins that way after optional leading whitespace and sign character)
are not counted as significant.
Like
.IR strtol ,
leading whitespace is ignored.
The sign character,
being a non\-digit,
is not counted
as significant
by
.BR strntol .
The \*(xx function
takes as the final two arguments
an optional pointer to a logging function
and
a pointer to
logging configuration data.
See
.B logger(3)
for details.
.PP
.SH EXAMPLE
.PP
char *e;
.br
long result;
.br
result = strntol("\-123456789", 4U, &e, 10, NULL, NULL);
.PP
returns
\-1234L
in
.I result
with
.I e
pointing to the digit '5'.
.SH RETURN VALUE
.B strntol
may return 0L
or
.B LONG_MIN
or
.B LONG_MAX
on input error,
with
.I errno
set to
.B EINVAL
or
.BR ERANGE .
.SH BUGS and CAVEATS
Because the return values on error
are also valid return values for legal input,
.I errno
can
be set to 0 before calling
.IR strntol ,
and checked after it returns
if error checking is desired.
.SH SEE ALSO
.IR logger ,
.I strtol
.SH AUTHOR
Bruce Lilly <bruce.lilly@gmail.com>
.SH LICENSE
.PP
The following license covers this software, including makefiles and documentation:
.PP
This software is covered by the zlib/libpng license.
.br
The zlib/libpng license is a recognized open source license by the
Open Source Initiative: http://opensource.org/licenses/Zlib
.br
The zlib/libpng license is a recognized \(dqfree\(dq software license by the
Free Software Foundation: https://directory.fsf.org/wiki/License:Zlib
.br
.lt +0.6i
.po 0.7i
.tl '*************** 'Copyright notice (part of the license)'***************'
.po
.lt
.br
@(#)strntol.3 2.1 2015-10-01T02:32:23Z copyright 2015 Bruce Lilly
.br
This software is provided 'as-is', without any express or implied warranty.
In no event will the authors be held liable for any damages arising from the
use of this software.
.PP
Permission is granted to anyone to use this software for any purpose,
including commercial applications, and to alter it and redistribute it freely,
subject to the following restrictions:
.IP 1. 0.3i
The origin of this software must not be misrepresented; you must not claim
that you wrote the original software. If you use this software in a
product, an acknowledgment in the product documentation would be
appreciated but is not required.
.IP 2. 0.3i
Altered source versions must be plainly marked as such, and must not be
misrepresented as being the original software.
.IP 3. 0.3i
This notice may not be removed or altered from any source distribution.
.RS 0
.lt +0.6i
.po 0.7i
.tl '*************************'(end of license)'*************************'
.po
.lt
.PP
You may send bug reports to bruce.lilly@gmail.com with subject "\*(xx".
.\" maintenance note: master file  /src/relaymail/s.strntol.3
