.\" Description: leap_second.3 version 2.1 man page 2015-10-01T03:23:59Z
.\" common man macros to V7, V10, DWB2 (unique ones omitted, differences noted)
.\" .TH n c x	V7,10	begin page n of chapter c; x is extra commentary
.\" .TH t s c n	DWB2	beg. pg. t of sect. s; c=extra comment, n=new man. name
.\"			c appears at bottom center of page, n at top center
.\" .SH text		subhead
.\" .SS text		sub-subhead
.\" .B text		make text bold
.\" .I text		make text italic
.\" .SM text		make text 1 point smaller than default
.\" .RI a b		concatenate and alternate Roman, Italic fonts <=6 args
.\" .IR .RB .BR .IB .BI	similar to .RI
.\" .PP			new paragraph
.\" .HP in		hanging paragraph with indent in
.\" .TP in		indented paragraph with hanging tag (on next line)
.\" .IP t in		indented paragraph with hanging tag t (arg 1)
.\" .RS in		increase relative indent by in
.\" .RE k		return to kth relative indent level (1-based)
.\" .DT			default tab settings
.\" .PD v		inter-paragraph spacing v (default 0.4v troff, 1v nroff)
.\" \*R			registered symbol	(Reg.)
.\" \*S			change to default type size
.lg 0	\" avoid groff's butt-ugly ligatures
.nh	\" no hyphenation
.ds ]W \" no 7th Edition designation
.ds xx leap_second
.TH \*(xx 3 ""
.SH NAME	\" 1 line	name \- explanatory text
.B \*(xx
\- identify and enumerate leap seconds
.SH SYNOPSIS
\fB#include <leap_second.h>\fP
.PP
.B int leap_second(const struct tm *ptm,
.B void (*)(int, void *, const char *, ...),
.B void *);
.PP
.B int leap_seconds_between(const struct tm *ptm1,
.B const struct tm *ptm2,
.B void (*)(int, void *, const char *, ...),
.B void *);
.PP
.SH DESCRIPTION
.nh	\" no hyphenation
The
.B leap_second
function indicates
whether
or not
the date\-time
referenced by
the data pointed to
by the supplied argument
corresponds to a known
(i.e. past, present, or announced future)
leap second,
and
the type of
leap second
(positive or negative).
The
date\-time
specified must be
UTC.
.PP
.B leap_seconds_between
counts the number of leap seconds
between (inclusive)
the two specified
date\-times.
The
date\-times
specified must be
UTC.
.PP
All \*(xx functions
take as the final two arguments
an optional pointer to a logging function
and
a pointer to
logging configuration data.
See
.B logger(3)
for details.
.PP
.SH RETURN VALUE
.B leap_second
returns
zero
on error (e.g. NULL pointer)
or if the specified
date\-time
does not correspond to a known
leap second.
Because
zero may be returned
either in the event of an error
or
for valid input,
a caller may set
the global variable
.I errno
to zero
before calling
.B leap_second
and then check
the value of
.I errno
if
.B leap_second
returns zero.
.B leap_second
returns
1
to indicate that
the specified date\-time
corresponds to
a known
positive
leap second,
and
returns
-1
to indicate a known
negative
leap second.
.PP
.B leap_seconds_between
returns
the
cumulative
number of seconds of adjustment
between
the specified
date\-times (inclusive),
or -1 on error (e.g. a NULL pointer).
Because
-1
might be a valid result
(if there is ever a negative leap second),
a caller may set
the global variable
.I errno
to zero
before calling
.B leap_second
and then check
the value of
.I errno
if
.B leap_seconds_between
returns -1.
.PP
.SH BUGS and CAVEATS
.PP
See above regarding return values and
.IR errno .
.PP
If you
lie to the functions,
(e.g. by providing date\-time other than UTC),
they
may lie to you.
.PP
.B leap_second
uses a static compiled
table of
known
leap seconds.
On the one hand,
this requires an update
each time a new leap second is announced.
On the other hand,
.B leap_second
is impervious to
denial\-of\-service
or other
attacks
which might be possible if
.B leap_second
were to read a
table of known leap seconds
from
an external file
or other
external resource.
.PP
.SH SEE ALSO
.IR logger .
.PP
IERS Bulletin C
.PP
ftp://hpiers.obspm.fr/iers/bul/bulc/BULLETINC.GUIDE
.br
https://www.iers.org/SharedDocs/News/EN/BulletinC.html
.br
ftp://hpiers.obspm.fr/iers/bul/bulc/bulletinc.dat
.PP
https://hpiers.obspm.fr/eop\-pc/index.php?index=TAI\-UTC_tab&lang=en
.PP
https://itunews.itu.int/En/4268\-Leap\-seconds\-BRRole\-of\-the\-
.br
International\-Earth\-Rotation\-and\-Reference\-Systems\-Service.note.aspx
.PP
https://www.ucolick.org/~sla/leapsecs/amsci.html
.PP
https://www.ucolick.org/~sla/leapsecs/timescales.html
.PP
https://www.ucolick.org/~sla/leapsecs/dutc.html
.PP
https://www.iana.org/time\-zones
.PP
https://github.com/eggert/tz/blob/master/README
.PP
.SH AUTHOR
Bruce Lilly <bruce.lilly@gmail.com>
.SH LICENSE
.PP
The following license covers this software, including makefiles and documentation:
.PP
This software is covered by the zlib/libpng license.
.br
The zlib/libpng license is a recognized open source license by the
Open Source Initiative: http://opensource.org/licenses/Zlib
.br
The zlib/libpng license is a recognized \(dqfree\(dq software license by the
Free Software Foundation: https://directory.fsf.org/wiki/License:Zlib
.br
.lt +0.6i
.po 0.7i
.tl '*************** 'Copyright notice (part of the license)'***************'
.po
.lt
.br
@(#)leap_second.3 2.1 2015-10-01T03:23:59Z copyright 2015 Bruce Lilly
.br
This software is provided 'as-is', without any express or implied warranty.
In no event will the authors be held liable for any damages arising from the
use of this software.
.PP
Permission is granted to anyone to use this software for any purpose,
including commercial applications, and to alter it and redistribute it freely,
subject to the following restrictions:
.IP 1. 0.3i
The origin of this software must not be misrepresented; you must not claim
that you wrote the original software. If you use this software in a
product, an acknowledgment in the product documentation would be
appreciated but is not required.
.IP 2. 0.3i
Altered source versions must be plainly marked as such, and must not be
misrepresented as being the original software.
.IP 3. 0.3i
This notice may not be removed or altered from any source distribution.
.RS 0
.lt +0.6i
.po 0.7i
.tl '*************************'(end of license)'*************************'
.po
.lt
.PP
You may send bug reports to bruce.lilly@gmail.com with subject "\*(xx".
.\" maintenance note: master file  /src/relaymail/lib/libleap_second/man/s.leap_second.3
